KEP-3962: Mutating admission policy documentation (#48646)
kubernetes/website: content/en/docs/reference/access-authn-authz/mutating-admission-policy.md

---
reviewers:
- deads2k
- sttts
- cici37
title: Mutating Admission Policy
content_type: concept
---

<!-- overview -->

> {{< feature-state feature_gate_name="MutatingAdmissionPolicy" >}}

Reviewer: I think we'll want to manually specify this.
```suggestion
{{< feature-state for_k8s_version="v1.32" state="alpha" >}}
<!-- due to feature gate history, use manual version specification here -->
```

This page provides an overview of _MutatingAdmissionPolicies_.

<!-- body -->

## What are MutatingAdmissionPolicies?

Mutating admission policies offer a declarative, in-process alternative to mutating admission webhooks.

Mutating admission policies use the Common Expression Language (CEL) to declare mutations to resources.
Mutations can be defined either with an *apply configuration* that is merged using the
[server side apply merge strategy](/docs/reference/using-api/server-side-apply/#merge-strategy),
or a [JSON patch](https://jsonpatch.com/).

Mutating admission policies are highly configurable, enabling policy authors to define policies
that can be parameterized and scoped to resources as needed by cluster administrators.

## What resources make a policy

A policy is generally made up of three resources:

- The MutatingAdmissionPolicy describes the abstract logic of a policy
  (think: "this policy sets a particular label to a particular value").

> - A MutatingAdmissionPolicyBinding links the above resources together and provides scoping.

Reviewer 2: What does "the above resources" refer to?

Author: Reordered, should be the mutatingadmissionpolicy along with any parameter resources.

- `object` - The object from the incoming request. The value is null for DELETE requests.
- `oldObject` - The existing object. The value is null for CREATE requests.
- `request` - Attributes of the API request.
- `params` - Parameter resource referred to by the policy binding being evaluated. Only populated if the policy has a ParamKind.
- `namespaceObject` - The namespace object that the incoming object belongs to. The value is null for cluster-scoped resources.
- `variables` - Map of composited variables, from its name to its lazily evaluated value.
  For example, a variable named `foo` can be accessed as `variables.foo`.
- `authorizer` - A CEL Authorizer. May be used to perform authorization checks for the principal (user or service account) of the request.
  See https://pkg.go.dev/k8s.io/apiserver/pkg/cel/library#Authz
- `authorizer.requestResource` - A CEL ResourceCheck constructed from the `authorizer` and configured with the
  request resource.

The `apiVersion`, `kind`, `metadata.name` and `metadata.generateName` are always accessible from the root of the  

> object. No other metadata properties are accessible.  

Reviewer 2: Is it able to check the labels of an object?
I don't mean I want to change it.

Author: Next line: "This means that you cannot emit an apply configuration to make any change to an object's labels or annotations."

Author: yes, thanks for catching!

Reviewer: OK, also: annotations?

---
reviewers:
- deads2k
- sttts
- cici37
title: Mutating Admission Policy
content_type: concept
---

<!-- overview -->

{{< feature-state feature_gate_name="MutatingAdmissionPolicy" >}}

This page provides an overview of _MutatingAdmissionPolicies_.

<!-- body -->

## What are MutatingAdmissionPolicies?

Mutating admission policies offer a declarative, in-process alternative to mutating admission webhooks.

Mutating admission policies use the Common Expression Language (CEL) to declare mutations to resources.
Mutations can be defined either with an *apply configuration* that is merged using the

> [server side apply merge strategy](/docs/reference/using-api/server-side-apply/#merge-strategy)

Reviewer: (nit) An Oxford-like comma may help:
```suggestion
[server side apply merge strategy](/docs/reference/using-api/server-side-apply/#merge-strategy),
```

or a [JSON patch](https://jsonpatch.com/).

Mutating admission policies are highly configurable, enabling policy authors to define policies
that can be parameterized and scoped to resources as needed by cluster administrators.

## What resources make a policy

A policy is generally made up of three resources:

- The MutatingAdmissionPolicy describes the abstract logic of a policy
  (think: "this policy sets a particular label to a particular value").

- A MutatingAdmissionPolicyBinding links the above resources together and provides scoping.

>   If you only want to set an `owner` label for `Pods`, the binding is where you would

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  If you only want to set an `owner` label for Pods, and not other API kinds, the binding is where you
```

  specify this mutation.

> - A parameter resource provides information to a MutatingAdmissionPolicy to make it a concrete

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A _parameter resource_ provides information to a MutatingAdmissionPolicy to make it a concrete
```

  statement (think "set the `owner` label to something like `company.example.com`").

>   A native type such as ConfigMap or a CRD defines the schema of a parameter resource.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Parameter resources are always in that the Kubernetes API (they can be built-in types or extensions,
  such as a {{< glossary_tooltip term_id="CustomResourceDefinition" text="CustomResourceDefinition" >}} (CRD).
```

>   MutatingAdmissionPolicy objects specify what Kind they are expecting for their parameter resource.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  MutatingAdmissionPolicy objects specify what kind they are expecting for their parameter resource.
```

At least a MutatingAdmissionPolicy and a corresponding MutatingAdmissionPolicyBinding
must be defined for a policy to have an effect.

If a MutatingAdmissionPolicy does not need to be configured via parameters, simply leave
`spec.paramKind` in  MutatingAdmissionPolicy not specified.

> ## Getting Started with Mutating Admission Policy

Reviewer: Based on our style guide, I recommend:
```suggestion
## Getting Started with MutatingAdmissionPolicies
```

> Mutating Admission Policy is part of the cluster control-plane. You should write

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Mutating admission policy is part of the cluster control-plane. You should write
```

Author: Fixed. Is the title fine or should that also be lower case?

`## Getting Started with Mutating Admission Policy`

and deploy them with great caution. The following describes how to quickly

> experiment with Mutating Admission Policy.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
experiment with mutating admission policy.
```

### Create a MutatingAdmissionPolicy

The following is an example of a MutatingAdmissionPolicy. This policy mutates newly created Pods to have a sidecar container if it does not exist.

> ```yaml

Reviewer: Please use a `code_sample` here.
See https://kubernetes.io/docs/contribute/style/hugo-shortcodes/#source-code-files

apiVersion: admissionregistration.k8s.io/v1alpha1
kind: MutatingAdmissionPolicy
metadata:
  name: "sidecar-policy.example.com"
spec:
  paramKind:
    kind: Sidecar
    apiVersion: mutations.example.com/v1
  matchConstraints:
    resourceRules:
    - apiGroups:   ["apps"]
      apiVersions: ["v1"]
      operations:  ["CREATE"]
      resources:   ["pods"]
  matchConditions:
    - name: does-not-already-have-sidecar

>       expression: "!object.spec.initContainers.exists(ic, ic.name == \"mesh-proxy\")"

Reviewer: Easier / more readable to use a YAML multiline string here, IMO.

Author: I agree for longer expressions but this seems reasonably contained, now that it's moved into a separate file

  failurePolicy: Fail
  reinvocationPolicy: IfNeeded
  mutations:
    - patchType: "ApplyConfiguration"
      applyConfiguration:
        expression: >
          Object{
            spec: Object.spec{
              initContainers: [
                Object.spec.initContainers{
                  name: "mesh-proxy",
                  image: "mesh/proxy:v1.0.0",
                  args: ["proxy", "sidecar"],
                  restartPolicy: "Always"
                }
              ]
            }
          }
```

> `spec.mutations` consists of a list of patches. Patches may be either [ApplyConfiguration](#applyconfiguration) or [JSON Patch](#json-patch).

Reviewer: Is this true?
```suggestion
The `.spec.mutations` field consists of a list of expressions that evaluate to resource patches.
The emitted patches may be either [apply configurations](#applyconfiguration) or [JSON Patch](#json-patch)
patches. You cannot specify an empty list of mutations.
```

To configure a mutating admission policy for use in a cluster, a binding is required. The following is an example of a MutatingAdmissionPolicyBinding:

```yaml
apiVersion: admissionregistration.k8s.io/v1alpha1
kind: MutatingAdmissionPolicyBinding
metadata:
  name: "sidecar-binding-test.example.com"
spec:
  policyName: "sidecar-policy.example.com"
```

> Next, the policy can be tested by creating a pod:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can test that admission policy by creating a Pod:
```

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
spec:
  initContainers:
  - name: myapp-initializer
    image: example/initializer:v1.0.0
  containers:
  - name: myapp

>     image: example/myapp:v1.0.0

Reviewer: A Pod would typically need a `.metadata.name` - can we either mark this as incomplete, or add in what's missing?

Author: added name

```

Since the API request to create it matches the MutatingAdmissionPolicy the pod will be mutated resulting in:

```yaml
apiVersion: v1

> kind: Pod

Reviewer: Let's mark the `.metadata` as elided.

spec:
  ...
  initContainers:
  - name: mesh-proxy
    image: mesh/proxy:v1.0.0
    args: ["proxy", "sidecar"]
    restartPolicy: Always
  - name: myapp-initializer
    image: example/initializer:v1.0.0
  containers:
  - name: myapp
    image: example/myapp:v1.0.0
```

#### Parameter Resources

> Parameter resources allow a policy configuration to be separate from its
> definition. A policy can define paramKind, which outlines GVK of the parameter
> resource, and then a policy binding ties a policy by name (via policyName) to a
> particular parameter resource via paramRef.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Parameter resources allow a policy configuration to be separate from its
definition. A policy can define `paramKind`, which outlines GVK of the parameter
resource, and then a policy binding ties a policy by name (via `policyName`) to a
particular parameter resource via `paramRef`.
```

At beta, we should explain what a GVK is. OK to add that clarification for alpha too.

If parameter configuration is needed, the following is an example of a
MutatingAdmissionPolicy with parameter configuration.

> ```yaml

Reviewer: Please use a `code_sample` here.
See https://kubernetes.io/docs/contribute/style/hugo-shortcodes/#source-code-files

apiVersion: admissionregistration.k8s.io/v1alpha1
kind: MutatingAdmissionPolicy
metadata:
  name: "sidecar-policy.example.com"
spec:
  paramKind:
    kind: Sidecar
    apiVersion: mutations.example.com/v1
  matchConstraints:
    resourceRules:
    - apiGroups:   ["apps"]
      apiVersions: ["v1"]
      operations:  ["CREATE"]
      resources:   ["pods"]
  matchConditions:
    - name: does-not-already-have-sidecar

>       expression: "!object.spec.initContainers.exists(ic, ic.name == params.name)"

Reviewer: Easier / more readable to use a YAML multiline string here, IMO.

  failurePolicy: Fail
  reinvocationPolicy: IfNeeded
  mutations:
    - patchType: "ApplyConfiguration"
      applyConfiguration:
        expression: >
          Object{
            spec: Object.spec{
              initContainers: [
                Object.spec.initContainers{
                  name: params.name,
                  image: params.image,
                  args: params.args,
                  restartPolicy: params.restartPolicy
                }
              ]
            }
          }
```

To configure an mutating admission policy for use in a cluster, a binding and
parameter resource are created. The following is an example of a

> MutatingAdmissionPolicyBinding that uses a cluster-wide param - the same param

Reviewer: (nit / fix not required for alpha)
```suggestion
MutatingAdmissionPolicyBinding that uses a cluster-wide parameter; the same parameter
```

will be used to validate every resource request that matches the binding:

```yaml
apiVersion: admissionregistration.k8s.io/v1alpha1
kind: MutatingAdmissionPolicyBinding
metadata:
  name: "sidecar-binding-test.example.com"
spec:
  policyName: "sidecar-policy.example.com"
  paramRef:
    name: "meshproxy-test.example.com"

>     namespace: "default"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    namespace: default # Avoid using the "default" namespace outside of tutorial examples
```

```

> The parameter resource could be as following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The parameter resource could be the following object:
```

Reviewer: This particular parameter is a Sidecar, and Sidecar's API looks like an object (has `.metadata` and `.spec`, has `.metadata.name`, etc).

```yaml
apiVersion: mutations.example.com/v1
kind: Sidecar
metadata: 
  name: meshproxy-test.example.com

>   namespace: default

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  namespace: default # Avoid using the "default" namespace outside of tutorial examples
```

spec:
  name: mesh-proxy
  image: mesh/proxy:v1.0.0
  args: ["proxy", "sidecar"]
  restartPolicy: Always
```

> #### ApplyConfiguration

Reviewer: (nit)
```suggestion
#### `ApplyConfiguration` {#patch-type-apply-configuration}
```

CEL expressions have access to the contents of the API request, organized into CEL variables as well as some other useful variables:

- `object` - The object from the incoming request. The value is null for DELETE requests.
- `oldObject` - The existing object. The value is null for CREATE requests.
- `request` - Attributes of the API request.
- `params` - Parameter resource referred to by the policy binding being evaluated. Only populated if the policy has a ParamKind.
- `namespaceObject` - The namespace object that the incoming object belongs to. The value is null for cluster-scoped resources.
- `variables` - Map of composited variables, from its name to its lazily evaluated value.
  For example, a variable named `foo` can be accessed as `variables.foo`.
- `authorizer` - A CEL Authorizer. May be used to perform authorization checks for the principal (user or service account) of the request.
  See https://pkg.go.dev/k8s.io/apiserver/pkg/cel/library#Authz
- `authorizer.requestResource` - A CEL ResourceCheck constructed from the `authorizer` and configured with the
  request resource.

> The `apiVersion`, `kind`, `metadata.name` and `metadata.generateName` are always accessible from the root of the
> object. No other metadata properties are accessible.

Reviewer: Optionally, and if correct:
```suggestion

The `apiVersion`, `kind`, `metadata.name` and `metadata.generateName` are always accessible from the root of the
object. No other metadata properties are accessible.
This means that you cannot emit an apply configuration to make any change to an object's labels or annotations.
```

> #### JSON Patch

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### `JSONPatch` {#patch-type-json-patch}
```

> The same mutation can be written as a JSONPatch as follows

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The same mutation can be written as a [JSON Patch](https://jsonpatch.com/) as follows:
```

> ```yaml

Reviewer: Please use a `code_sample` here.
See https://kubernetes.io/docs/contribute/style/hugo-shortcodes/#source-code-files

apiVersion: admissionregistration.k8s.io/v1alpha1
kind: MutatingAdmissionPolicy
metadata:
  name: "sidecar-policy.example.com"
spec:
  paramKind:
    kind: Sidecar
    apiVersion: mutations.example.com/v1
  matchConstraints:
    resourceRules:
    - apiGroups:   [""]
      apiVersions: ["v1"]
      operations:  ["CREATE"]
      resources:   ["pods"]
  matchConditions:
    - name: does-not-already-have-sidecar
      expression: "!object.spec.initContainers.exists(ic, ic.name == \"mesh-proxy\")"
  failurePolicy: Fail
  reinvocationPolicy: IfNeeded
  mutations:
    - patchType: "JSONPatch"
      jsonPatch:
        expression: >
          [
            JSONPatch{
              op: "add", path: "/spec/initContainers/-",
              value: Object.spec.initContainers{
                name: "mesh-proxy",
                image: "mesh-proxy/v1.0.0",
                restartPolicy: "Always"
              }
            }
          ]
```

The expression will be evaluated by CEL to create a [JSON patch](https://jsonpatch.com/).
ref: https://github.com/google/cel-spec

> expression must return an array of JSONPatch values.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each evaluated `expression` must return an array of `JSONPatch` values. The
`JSONPatch` type represents one operation from a JSON patch.
```

(would be easier to have named the type as `JSONPatchOperation`, but too late now I suspect)

For example, this CEL expression returns a JSON patch to conditionally modify a value:

> ```yaml

Author: removed

  [
    JSONPatch{op: "test", path: "/spec/example", value: "Red"},
    JSONPatch{op: "replace", path: "/spec/example", value: "Green"}
  ]
```

> To define an object for the patch value, use Object types. For example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To define a JSON object for a patch operation `value`, use CEL `Object` types. For example:
```

```
  [
    JSONPatch{
      op: "add",
      path: "/spec/selector",
      value: Object.spec.selector{matchLabels: {"environment": "test"}}
    }
  ]
```

> To use strings containing '/' and '~' as JSONPatch path keys, use `jsonpatch.escapeKey`. For example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To use strings containing '/' and '~' as JSONPatch path keys, use `jsonpatch.escapeKey()`. For example:
```
